
CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT 2019 - KEY PROVISIONS

DEFINITION OF CONSUMER (Section 2(7))
A consumer is any person who buys goods or avails services for personal use and not 
for resale or commercial purpose. Includes online purchases.

CONSUMER RIGHTS (Section 2(9))
1. Right to be protected against marketing of goods and services hazardous to life and property
2. Right to be informed about quality, quantity, potency, purity, standard and price
3. Right to be assured access to goods and services at competitive prices
4. Right to be heard and assured consideration at appropriate forums
5. Right to seek redressal against unfair trade practices
6. Right to consumer education

DEFICIENCY IN SERVICE (Section 2(11))
Any fault, imperfection, shortcoming or inadequacy in the quality, nature and manner 
of performance which is required to be maintained by a person in pursuance of a 
contract or as required under any law for the time being in force.

UNFAIR TRADE PRACTICE (Section 2(47))
A trade practice which, for the purpose of promoting the sale, use or supply of any 
goods or for the provision of any service, adopts any unfair method or unfair or 
deceptive practice including false representation about goods or services.

CONSUMER DISPUTES REDRESSAL COMMISSIONS
District Commission: Claims up to Rs 50 lakhs
State Commission: Claims from Rs 50 lakhs to Rs 2 crores  
National Commission: Claims above Rs 2 crores

COMPLAINT PROCEDURE
Any consumer can file complaint about defective goods, deficient services, unfair 
trade practices, or overcharging. Complaint must be filed within 2 years of cause 
of action. Filing fee starts from Rs 200. Can file online at edaakhil.nic.in.

PENALTIES FOR MANUFACTURERS
If goods cause injury: fine up to Rs 10 lakhs, imprisonment up to 2 years
If goods cause death: fine up to Rs 50 lakhs, imprisonment up to 7 years

PRODUCT LIABILITY (Chapter VI)
Manufacturer, seller and service provider are liable for harm caused by defective 
product or deficient service. No need to prove negligence for product liability claims.

E-COMMERCE RULES 2020
E-commerce entities must display country of origin, provide information about sellers, 
acknowledge complaints within 48 hours, redress within 1 month.

MEDIATION
Consumer disputes can be referred to mediation before or during proceedings. 
Mediation centers established at district and state level.
