
INDIAN PENAL CODE 1860 - IMPORTANT SECTIONS

SECTION 299 - CULPABLE HOMICIDE
Whoever causes death by doing an act with the intention of causing death, or with the 
intention of causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause death, or with the knowledge 
that he is likely by such act to cause death, commits the offence of culpable homicide.

SECTION 300 - MURDER
Culpable homicide is murder if the act by which the death is caused is done with the 
intention of causing death, or with the intention of causing such bodily injury as the 
offender knows to be likely to cause the death of the person to whom the harm is caused.

SECTION 302 - PUNISHMENT FOR MURDER
Whoever commits murder shall be punished with death, or imprisonment for life, 
and shall also be liable to fine.

SECTION 304 - PUNISHMENT FOR CULPABLE HOMICIDE NOT AMOUNTING TO MURDER
Whoever commits culpable homicide not amounting to murder shall be punished with 
imprisonment for life, or imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.

SECTION 304A - CAUSING DEATH BY NEGLIGENCE
Whoever causes the death of any person by doing any rash or negligent act not 
amounting to culpable homicide shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.

SECTION 304B - DOWRY DEATH
Where the death of a woman is caused by any burns or bodily injury or occurs under 
abnormal circumstances within seven years of marriage, and it is shown that she was 
subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or his relatives for demand of dowry, 
such death shall be called dowry death. Punishment: minimum 7 years to life imprisonment.

SECTION 306 - ABETMENT OF SUICIDE
If any person commits suicide, whoever abets the commission of such suicide 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.

SECTION 307 - ATTEMPT TO MURDER
Whoever does any act with such intention or knowledge, and under such circumstances 
that, if he by that act caused death, he would be guilty of murder, shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, 
and shall also be liable to fine.

SECTION 354 - ASSAULT OR CRIMINAL FORCE TO WOMAN WITH INTENT TO OUTRAGE HER MODESTY
Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any woman, intending to outrage or knowing 
it to be likely that he will thereby outrage her modesty, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, 
or with fine, or with both.

SECTION 375 - RAPE
A man is said to commit rape who has sexual intercourse with a woman under circumstances 
falling under any of the following descriptions: against her will, without her consent, 
with her consent obtained by putting her in fear of death or hurt.

SECTION 376 - PUNISHMENT FOR RAPE
Whoever commits rape shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment of either description 
for a term which shall not be less than seven years but which may extend to imprisonment 
for life, and shall also be liable to fine.

SECTION 378 - THEFT
Whoever, intending to take dishonestly any moveable property out of the possession of 
any person without that person's consent, moves that property in order to such taking, 
is said to commit theft.

SECTION 379 - PUNISHMENT FOR THEFT
Whoever commits theft shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.

SECTION 380 - THEFT IN DWELLING HOUSE
Whoever commits theft in any building, tent or vessel, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, 
and shall also be liable to fine.

SECTION 383 - EXTORTION
Whoever intentionally puts any person in fear of any injury to that person, or to any 
other, and thereby dishonestly induces the person so put in fear to deliver to any 
person any property or valuable security commits extortion.

SECTION 390 - ROBBERY
In all robbery there is either theft or extortion. Theft is robbery if the offender 
commits or attempts to commit the theft, and for that end voluntarily causes or 
attempts to cause to any person death or hurt or wrongful restraint.

SECTION 395 - PUNISHMENT FOR DACOITY
Whoever commits dacoity shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with 
rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also 
be liable to fine.

SECTION 405 - CRIMINAL BREACH OF TRUST
Whoever, being in any manner entrusted with property, or with any dominion over property, 
dishonestly misappropriates or converts to his own use that property, or dishonestly 
uses or disposes of that property in violation of any direction of law commits criminal 
breach of trust.

SECTION 406 - PUNISHMENT FOR CRIMINAL BREACH OF TRUST
Whoever commits criminal breach of trust shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.

SECTION 415 - CHEATING
Whoever, by deceiving any person, fraudulently or dishonestly induces the person so 
deceived to deliver any property to any person, or to consent that any person shall 
retain any property, or intentionally induces the person so deceived to do or omit to 
do anything which he would not do or omit if he were not so deceived, commits cheating.

SECTION 420 - CHEATING AND DISHONESTLY INDUCING DELIVERY OF PROPERTY
Whoever cheats and thereby dishonestly induces the person deceived to deliver any 
property to any person, or to make, alter or destroy the whole or any part of a 
valuable security, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.

SECTION 441 - CRIMINAL TRESPASS
Whoever enters into or upon property in the possession of another with intent to 
commit an offence or to intimidate, insult or annoy any person in possession of 
such property, commits criminal trespass.

SECTION 463 - FORGERY
Whoever makes any false document or false electronic record or part of a document 
or electronic record with intent to cause damage or injury, to the public or to any 
person, or to support any claim or title, or to cause any person to part with property, 
commits forgery.

SECTION 468 - FORGERY FOR PURPOSE OF CHEATING
Whoever commits forgery, intending that the document or electronic record forged 
shall be used for the purpose of cheating, shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be 
liable to fine.

SECTION 489A - COUNTERFEITING CURRENCY NOTES OR BANK NOTES
Whoever counterfeits, or knowingly performs any part of the process of counterfeiting, 
any currency note or bank note shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, 
and shall also be liable to fine.

SECTION 493 - COHABITATION CAUSED BY A MAN DECEITFULLY INDUCING A BELIEF OF LAWFUL MARRIAGE
Every man who by deceit causes any woman who is not lawfully married to him to believe 
that she is lawfully married to him and to cohabit or have sexual intercourse with him 
in that belief, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.

SECTION 496 - MARRIAGE CEREMONY FRAUDULENTLY GONE THROUGH WITHOUT LAWFUL MARRIAGE
Whoever, dishonestly or with a fraudulent intention, goes through the ceremony of 
being married, knowing that he is not thereby lawfully married, shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, 
and shall also be liable to fine.

SECTION 498A - HUSBAND OR RELATIVE OF HUSBAND OF A WOMAN SUBJECTING HER TO CRUELTY
Whoever, being the husband or the relative of the husband of a woman, subjects such 
woman to cruelty shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three years and shall also be liable to fine. Cruelty means wilful conduct likely to 
drive the woman to suicide or cause grave injury, or harassment for unlawful demands 
of property or valuable security.

SECTION 499 - DEFAMATION
Whoever, by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by visible 
representations, makes or publishes any imputation concerning any person intending 
to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm the 
reputation of such person, is said to defame that person.

SECTION 500 - PUNISHMENT FOR DEFAMATION
Whoever defames another shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.

SECTION 503 - CRIMINAL INTIMIDATION
Whoever threatens another with any injury to his person, reputation or property, or 
to the person or reputation of any one in whom that person is interested, with intent 
to cause alarm to that person, or to cause that person to do any act which he is not 
legally bound to do, commits criminal intimidation.

SECTION 506 - PUNISHMENT FOR CRIMINAL INTIMIDATION
Whoever commits the offence of criminal intimidation shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, 
or with fine, or with both.

SECTION 509 - WORD, GESTURE OR ACT INTENDED TO INSULT THE MODESTY OF A WOMAN
Whoever, intending to insult the modesty of any woman, utters any word, makes any 
sound or gesture, or exhibits any object, intending that such word or sound shall be 
heard, or that such gesture or object shall be seen by such woman, shall be punished 
with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, and also with fine.
